[KOGITO-6806] [KSW-Guides] Serverless Workflow with the Saga example (#37)
kiegroup/kogito-docs: serverlessworkflow/modules/ROOT/pages/use-cases/orchestration-based-saga-pattern.adoc

=== Saga participants interactions

To define the interactions among participants in the Saga using Serverless Workflow Specification, you can use link:{spec_doc_url}#workflow-states[states] with transitions link:{spec_doc_url}#Transitions[transitions] corresponding to the participants' interactions.

Each state represents a step to be achieved in the Saga and an action associated with the state represents how to invoke a participant to execute a given step, for instance, `processPayment` state has the `processPaymentAction` action responsible to invoke the function to execute the payment processing, that might be done by the participant `Payment Service`.
The `transition` attribute represents the next step to be started, to perform the order shipping scheduling for the Saga.

[#payment-state]
.Example the state declaration representing the process payment step in the Saga
[source,json]
{
"name": "processPayment",
"type": "operation",
"actions": [
    {

>     "name": "processPaymentAction",

Reviewer: maybe improve the aligment?

Author: done

    "results": ".",
    "toStateData": ".paymentResponse"
    }
    }
    ],
    "transition": "scheduleShipping",
    "compensatedBy": "CancelPayment",
    "onErrors": [
    {
    "errorRef": "process payment failed",
    "transition": "ServiceError"
    }
]
}

=== Compensations

The core functionality when designing the Saga is the compensation for each step to be executed by a participant.
In serverless workflow, each state should define how it should be compensated using its compensatedBy property, which indicates another state responsible to perform the compensation for it, i.e. processPayment defines the CancelPayment as the compensation, as define in the <<payment-state, payment state>>.

[source,json]
"compensatedBy": "CancelPayment"

=== Errors

Compensations are triggered as soon as an error occurs, according to the errors definitions associated states on serverless workflow, where they are identified by a name, for instance, on `processPayment` there is the error `process payment failed` which is a reference to the <<#errors-definitions, errors section>> in the workflow definition.

[#errors-definitions]
.Example the error declaration for the Saga
[source,json]

> "errors" : [

Reviewer: maybe improve the alignment

Author: done

Author: done

= Orchestration-based SAGA pattern
=====================================================
06-27-2022
:compat-mode!:
// Metadata:
:description: Saga Pattern use case example
:keywords: kogito, workflow, serverless, saga, saga pattern, consistency, microservices, orchestration, orchestrator

== Brief introduction to Saga pattern

Saga is a design pattern to manage data consistency across participants in distributed transaction scenarios.

In a microservice architecture, a participant could be defined as a microservice, responsible to perform actions related to its business domain.

> Saga is meant to provide transaction management using a sequence of steps.

Reviewer 2: I was going to say to add a link to a reliable source explaining the Saga Pattern, but I couldn't find one. :(

Reviewer 2: Oh, that's a nice reference!

Author: Yeah, I'll add a reference here to the paper.

> While executing a step, failures might happen, in this situation, a sequence of compensating actions are executed to undo the changes that were made during the execution, or to leave the system in a known termination state, aiming for consistency.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While executing a step, failures might happen. In this situation, a sequence of compensating actions is executed to undo the changes made during the execution or leave the system in a known termination state, aiming for consistency.
```

Author: +1

== The order fulfillment example

This is a very common use case, present in many e-commerce companies and for sure it should be familiar to you.

> The basic idea in this scenario is a user buys some item through an e-commerce application inputting the payment method and delivery information and waits for this item to be delivered at the specified address.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The basic idea in this scenario is a user buys some item through an e-commerce application inputting the payment method and delivery information, and waits for this item to be delivered at the specified address.
```

Author: +1

Given this use case, what happens behind the scenes is a sequence of steps that should be executed to complete the order, as shown in the picture:

.Example Order fulfillment
image::use-cases/orchestration-based-saga-pattern/order-fulfillment-example.png[]

> In the example there are mainly the following steps:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the example, there are the mainly following steps:
```

Author: +1

<1> _Order checkout_: the user confirms the order with the chosen items, payment method, and delivery address.
<2> _Stock reservation_: where this item from the order is selected from the stock and reserved, being removed from the total stock item.
<3> _Payment processing_: based on the payment method and the user information, for instance, the credit card, the credit is checked and allocated to that payment.
<4> _Shipping processing_: it represents a mechanism that could communicate with third-party systems responsible to deliver orders or even an internal system responsible for logistics and delivery.

> In the below picture, it is possible to visualize the two main flows in case of success or failure, during the order fulfillment flow which describes a Saga pattern.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The below picture makes it possible to visualize the two main flows in case of success or failure during the order fulfillment flow, which describes a Saga pattern.
```

.Example Order fulfillment Saga
image::use-cases/orchestration-based-saga-pattern/order-fulfillment-saga.png[]

> In the first case, the happy path, the item stock is reserved, after that, the payment is successfully processed and finally, the order shipping is scheduled and the flow is completed for that order.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the first case, the happy path, the item stock is reserved. After that, the payment is successfully processed, the order shipping is scheduled, and the flow is completed for that order.
```

Author: +1

> The second case describes an example where a failure or any error is thrown during the shipping process for a given order, in this situation, a sequence of compensation actions is executed, which cancels the payment, and releases the stock for the items related to that order.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The second case describes an example of a failure or any error thrown during the shipping process for a given order. In this situation, a sequence of compensation actions is executed, which cancels the payment, and releases the stock for the items related to that order.
```

Author: +1

== Saga orchestration with Serverless workflow

As a developer, you can use link:{spec_doc_url}[Serverless Workflow] to create a Saga defining the participants' calls with all the steps and compensations.

> In this scenario, Kogito with serverless workflow plays the Saga Executor Coordinator (SEC) role, which orchestrates the calls to the participants in the Saga.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this scenario, Kogito Serverless Workflow plays the Saga Executor Coordinator (SEC) role, which orchestrates the calls to the participants in the Saga.
```

> The order fulfillment example is used to showcase how to define the Saga with Kogito using Serverless Workflow, the source code can be found here link:{kogito_sw_examples_url}/serverless-workflow-saga-quarkus[serverless-workflow-saga-quarkus].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The order fulfillment example showcases how to define the Saga with Kogito Serverless Workflow. The source code can be found here in link:{kogito_sw_examples_url}/serverless-workflow-saga-quarkus[serverless-workflow-saga-quarkus].
```

Author: +1

The workflow definition used to define the order saga is link:{kogito_sw_examples_url}/serverless-workflow-saga-quarkus/src/main/resources/order-saga-error-handling.sw.json[order-saga-error-handling.sw.json].

.Example Order fulfillment Saga Workflow
image::use-cases/orchestration-based-saga-pattern/order-fulfillment-saga-workflow.png[]

> In the workflow diagram you can see how to describe the calls to the participants, the possible errors that each service can throw, and finally, how to define compensations to each step to be executed once an error happens during workflow execution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the workflow diagram, you can see how to describe the calls to the participants, the possible errors each service can throw, and how to define compensations for each step to be executed once an error happens during workflow execution.
```

Author: +1

=== Saga participants interactions

> To define the interactions among participants in the Saga using Serverless Workflow Specification, you can use link:{spec_doc_url}#workflow-states[states] with transitions link:{spec_doc_url}#Transitions[transitions] corresponding to the participants' interactions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To define the interactions among participants in the Saga using Serverless Workflow Specification, you can use link:{spec_doc_url}#workflow-states[states] with link:{spec_doc_url}#Transitions[transitions] corresponding to the participants' interactions.
```

Author: +1

> Each state represents a step to be achieved in the Saga and an action associated with the state represents how to invoke a participant to execute a given step, for instance, `processPayment` state has the `processPaymentAction` action responsible to invoke the function to execute the payment processing, that might be done by the participant `Payment Service`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each state represents a step to be achieved in the Saga, and an action associated with the state represents how to invoke a participant to execute a given step. So, for instance, the `processPayment` state has the `processPaymentAction` action responsible for invoking the function to execute the payment processing, which the participant `Payment Service` might do.
```

Author: +1

The `transition` attribute represents the next step to be started, to perform the order shipping scheduling for the Saga.

[#payment-state]
.Example the state declaration representing the process payment step in the Saga
[source,json]
----
{
   "name":"processPayment",
   "type":"operation",

>    "actions":[
>       {
>          "name":"processPaymentAction",
>          "functionRef":{
>             "refName":"processPayment",
>             "arguments":{
>                "orderId":".orderId",
>                "failService":".failService"
>             }
>          },
>          "actionDataFilter":{
>             "results":".",
>             "toStateData":".paymentResponse"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   "actions":[
      {
         "name":"processPaymentAction",
         "functionRef":{
            "refName":"processPayment",
            "arguments":{
               "orderId":"${ .orderId }",
               "failService":"${ .failService }"
            }
         },
         "actionDataFilter":{
            "results":"${ . }",
            "toStateData":"${ .paymentResponse }"
```

Just to make it clear for new readers that these are expressions.

         }
      }
   ],
   "transition":"scheduleShipping",
   "compensatedBy":"CancelPayment",
   "onErrors":[
      {
         "errorRef":"process payment failed",
         "transition":"ServiceError"
      }
   ]
}
----

=== Compensations

The core functionality when designing the Saga is the compensation for each step to be executed by a participant.
In serverless workflow, each state should define how it should be compensated using its compensatedBy property, which indicates another state responsible to perform the compensation for it, i.e. processPayment defines the CancelPayment as the compensation, as define in the <<payment-state, payment state>>.

[source,json]
"compensatedBy": "CancelPayment"

=== Errors

> Compensations are triggered as soon as an error occurs, according to the errors definitions associated states on serverless workflow, where they are identified by a name, for instance, on `processPayment` there is the error `process payment failed` which is a reference to the <<#errors-definitions, errors section>> in the workflow definition.

Reviewer 2: Can we break this paragraph a little bit?

Author: +1

[#errors-definitions]
.Example the error declaration for the Saga
[source,json]
----
{
   "errors":[
      {
         "name":"reserve stock failed",
         "code":"org.kie.kogito.ServiceException"
      },
      {
         "name":"process payment failed",
         "code":"org.kie.kogito.ServiceException"
      },
      {
         "name":"shipping failed",
         "code":"org.kie.kogito.ServiceException"
      }
   ]
}
----

> The defined error uses the FQDN of Java exceptions thrown by functions, in the given example, `org.kie.kogito.ServiceException` is thrown by they service calls defined as a  <<#custom-function, Java method>> here is the link:{kogito_sw_examples_url}/serverless-workflow-saga-quarkus/src/main/java/org/kie/kogito/PaymentService.java[source], however, they could be any type of link:{spec_doc_url}#workflow-functions[functions], i.e REST, OpenAPI, gRPC, etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The defined error uses the FQCN of Java exceptions thrown by functions, in the given example, `org.kie.kogito.ServiceException` is thrown by they service calls defined as a  <<#custom-function, Java method>> here is the link:{kogito_sw_examples_url}/serverless-workflow-saga-quarkus/src/main/java/org/kie/kogito/PaymentService.java[source], however, they could be any type of link:{spec_doc_url}#workflow-functions[functions], i.e REST, OpenAPI, gRPC, etc.
```

Author: +1

For more details about error handling see xref:core/understanding-workflow-error-handling.adoc[Understanding workflow error handling].

[#custom-function]
.Example custom function using a Java class and method
[source,json]
----
{
   "name":"reserveStock",
   "type":"custom",
   "operation":"service:org.kie.kogito.PaymentService::processPayment"
}
----

> Kogito workflow engine controls all steps that were executed and should be compensated, in a stateful manner, this means the Saga can be long-lived, containing wait states among on the steps in the workflow, this means after each wait state the workflow is persisted and can continue in a different request, but for simplicity, this example shows the Saga as a request-response, also called straight-through workflow.

Reviewer 2: I'd rewrite this paragraph. There are too many commas, and it's too long. It isn't easy to understand.

Author: +1

> === Running and testing the example

Reviewer 2: I think we can leave this instruction to the example README.

Author: yep, the example has a description but I've rewritten it here, but I can update the example README, and keep it just there, no problem.

      }
   }
}
----

In the console executing the application, you can check the log with the executed steps.

.Example console output
[source, shell]
----
2022-06-24 13:43:45,077 INFO  [org.kie.kog.StockService] (executor-thread-0) Reserve Stock for order 03e6cf79-3301-434b-b5e1-d6899b5639aa
2022-06-24 13:43:45,215 INFO  [org.kie.kog.PaymentService] (executor-thread-0) Process Payment for order 03e6cf79-3301-434b-b5e1-d6899b5639aa
2022-06-24 13:43:45,219 INFO  [org.kie.kog.ShippingService] (executor-thread-0) Schedule Shipping for order 03e6cf79-3301-434b-b5e1-d6899b5639aa
2022-06-24 13:43:45,219 ERROR [org.kie.kog.MockService] (executor-thread-0) Error in ShippingService for 03e6cf79-3301-434b-b5e1-d6899b5639aa
2022-06-24 13:43:45,230 INFO  [org.kie.kog.PaymentService] (executor-thread-0) Cancel Payment 4b94408d-8cad-432d-85bb-63dd79c4071e
2022-06-24 13:43:45,239 INFO  [org.kie.kog.StockService] (executor-thread-0) Cancel Stock 9d543764-8a8b-4d94-aaee-e6ccbe9c94c3
2022-06-24 13:43:45,244 INFO  [org.kie.kog.OrderService] (executor-thread-0) Order Failed 03e6cf79-3301-434b-b5e1-d6899b5639aa

----

== Additional resources

> * xref:core/understanding-workflow-error-handling.adoc[Understanding workflow error handling].

Author: +1

<3> _Payment processing_: based on the payment method and the user information, for instance, the credit card, the credit is checked and allocated to that payment.
<4> _Shipping processing_: it represents a mechanism that could communicate with third-party systems responsible to deliver orders or even an internal system responsible for logistics and delivery.

The below picture makes it possible to visualize the two main flows in case of success or failure during the order fulfillment flow, which describes a Saga pattern.

.Example Order fulfillment Saga
image::use-cases/orchestration-based-saga-pattern/order-fulfillment-saga.png[]

In the first case, the happy path, the item stock is reserved. After that, the payment is successfully processed, the order shipping is scheduled, and the flow is completed for that order.

The second case describes an example of a failure or any error thrown during the shipping process for a given order. In this situation, a sequence of compensation actions is executed, which cancels the payment, and releases the stock for the items related to that order.

== Saga orchestration with Serverless workflow

> As a developer, you can use link:{spec_doc_url}[Serverless Workflow] to create a Saga defining the participants' calls with all the steps and compensations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As a developer, you can use link:{spec_doc_url}[Serverless Workflow] to create a workflow that impletemens the Saga pattern where you can define all the steps and compensations.
```
maybe a bit clear? just a suggestion

Author: +1

In this scenario, Kogito Serverless Workflow plays the Saga Executor Coordinator (SEC) role, which orchestrates the calls to the participants in the Saga.

The order fulfillment example showcases how to define the Saga with Kogito Serverless Workflow. The source code can be found here in link:{kogito_sw_examples_url}/serverless-workflow-saga-quarkus[serverless-workflow-saga-quarkus].

The workflow definition used to define the order saga is link:{kogito_sw_examples_url}/serverless-workflow-saga-quarkus/src/main/resources/order-saga-error-handling.sw.json[order-saga-error-handling.sw.json].

.Example Order fulfillment Saga Workflow
image::use-cases/orchestration-based-saga-pattern/order-fulfillment-saga-workflow.png[]

> In the workflow diagram, you can see how to describe the calls to the participants, the possible errors each service can throw, and how to define compensations for each step to be executed once an error happens during workflow execution.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the workflow diagram, you can see the calls to the participants, the possible errors each service can throw, and how to define compensations for each step to be executed once an error happens during workflow execution.
```
just not sure about the use of `calls` but maybe something @hmanwani-rh can review later on.

Author: +1

=== Saga participants interactions

> To define the interactions among participants in the Saga using Serverless Workflow Specification, you can use link:{spec_doc_url}#workflow-states[states] with link:{spec_doc_url}#Transitions[transitions] corresponding to the participants' interactions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To define the interactions among participants in the Saga using Serverless Workflow Specification, you can use link:{spec_doc_url}#workflow-states[states] with link:{spec_doc_url}#Transitions[transitions] corresponding to the participant's interactions.
```

Author: +1

The `transition` attribute represents the next step to be started, to perform the order shipping scheduling for the Saga.

[#payment-state]
.Example the state declaration representing the process payment step in the Saga
[source,json]
----
{
   "name":"processPayment",
   "type":"operation",
   "actions":[
      {
         "name":"processPaymentAction",
         "functionRef":{
            "refName":"processPayment",
            "arguments":{
               "orderId":".orderId",
               "failService":".failService"
            }
         },
         "actionDataFilter":{
            "results":".",
            "toStateData":".paymentResponse"
         }
      }
   ],
   "transition":"scheduleShipping",
   "compensatedBy":"CancelPayment",
   "onErrors":[
      {
         "errorRef":"process payment failed",
         "transition":"ServiceError"
      }
   ]
}
----

=== Compensations

The core functionality when designing the Saga is the compensation for each step to be executed by a participant.

> In serverless workflow, each state should define how it should be compensated using its `compensatedBy` attribute, which indicates another state responsible to perform the compensation for it, i.e. `processPayment` defines the `CancelPayment` as the compensation on the  <<payment-state, payment state>>.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In Serverless Workflow, each state should define how it should be compensated using its `compensatedBy` attribute, which indicates another state responsible to perform the compensation for it, i.e. `processPayment` defines the `CancelPayment` as the compensation on the  <<payment-state, payment state>>.
```

Author: +1

[source,json]
"compensatedBy": "CancelPayment"

=== Errors

> Once an error occurs during the workflow execution, the compensation flow is then triggered.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once an error occurs during the workflow execution, a compensation flow is then triggered.
```

Author: +1

Errors are identified by a name and can be associated with a state, for instance, for the `processPayment` state, there is the `process payment failed` error, which is a reference to the <<#errors-definitions, errors section>> in the workflow definition.

[#errors-definitions]
.Example the error declaration for the Saga
[source,json]
----
{
   "errors":[
      {
         "name":"reserve stock failed",
         "code":"org.kie.kogito.ServiceException"
      },
      {
         "name":"process payment failed",
         "code":"org.kie.kogito.ServiceException"
      },
      {
         "name":"shipping failed",
         "code":"org.kie.kogito.ServiceException"
      }
   ]
}
----

> Error definition uses the FQCN of Java exceptions thrown by functions, in the given example, `org.kie.kogito.ServiceException` is thrown by they service calls defined as a  <<#custom-function, Java method>> here is the link:{kogito_sw_examples_url}/serverless-workflow-saga-quarkus/src/main/java/org/kie/kogito/PaymentService.java[source], however, they could be any type of link:{spec_doc_url}#workflow-functions[functions], i.e REST, OpenAPI, gRPC, etc.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An error definition uses the FQCN of Java exceptions thrown by functions, in the given example, `org.kie.kogito.ServiceException` is thrown by they service calls defined as a  <<#custom-function, Java method>> here is the link:{kogito_sw_examples_url}/serverless-workflow-saga-quarkus/src/main/java/org/kie/kogito/PaymentService.java[source], however, they could be any type of link:{spec_doc_url}#workflow-functions[functions], i.e REST, OpenAPI, gRPC, etc.
```

Author: +1

For more details about error handling see xref:core/understanding-workflow-error-handling.adoc[Understanding workflow error handling].

[#custom-function]
.Example custom function using a Java class and method
[source,json]
----
{
   "name":"reserveStock",
   "type":"custom",
   "operation":"service:org.kie.kogito.PaymentService::processPayment"
}
----

> Kogito workflow engine controls the execution flow keeping track of the steps to compensate where the compensation states are executed in a reverse order of each completed step.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Kogito workflow engine controls the execution flow keeping track of the steps that need compensation. The engine also ensures that the compensation states are executed in reverse order of each completed step.
```

> The engine is a stateful, which allows Saga to be long-lived containing wait states, such as callbacks. After each wait state, the workflow is persisted and can continue once it receives another request or event.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The engine is stateful, which allows Saga to be long-lived containing wait states, such as callbacks. After each wait state, the workflow is persisted and can continue once it receives another request or event.
```

> For simplicity, the current example shows the Saga as a request-response, also called straight-through workflow, where in the same start request the workflow is totally executed and the response is returned.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For simplicity, the current example shows a Saga workflow executed as a request-response. This is also called straight-through workflow, meaning that an entire workflow is executed from start to end in a single request.
```

Author: +1

==== Creating a new Success Order
:order_saga_workflow_path: order_saga_error_workflow
//POST /{order_saga_workflow_path}

.Example success request
[source,shell]
----
curl -L -X POST "http://localhost:8080/order_saga_error_workflow" -H 'Content-Type: application/json' --data-raw '{
 "workflowdata": {
  "orderId": "03e6cf79-3301-434b-b5e1-d6899b5639aa"
 }
}'
----

.Example success response
[source,json]
----
{
   "id":"b5c0bf16-1e37-4d7a-82cd-610809090d9c",
   "workflowdata":{
      "orderId":"03e6cf79-3301-434b-b5e1-d6899b5639aa",
      "stockResponse":{
         "type":"SUCCESS",
         "resourceId":"dc32abe6-9706-4061-8e96-910d8e06728d"
      },
      "paymentResponse":{
         "type":"SUCCESS",
         "resourceId":"505259d9-1c12-40ea-af5d-679e2cd89394"
      },
      "shippingResponse":{
         "type":"SUCCESS",
         "resourceId":"d6e2d538-0229-4b8e-a363-17ebabdb3585"
      },
      "orderResponse":{
         "type":"SUCCESS",
         "resourceId":"03e6cf79-3301-434b-b5e1-d6899b5639aa"
      }
   }
}
----

The response contains the workflow data with nested attributes representing the responses related to the execution of each step, either success or failure.

> The `orderResponse` indicates if the order can be confirmed by the client starting the Saga process, in case of `success` or canceled, in case of `error`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `orderResponse` indicates if the order can be confirmed by the client starting the Saga process, in case of `success` or canceled, in case of `error`.
```
The end of the sentence is a bit confusing, can you clarify that?

Author: +1

In the console executing the application, you can check the log with information related to the executed steps.

.Example console output
[source, shell]
----

> 2022-06-24 13:44:36,666 INFO  [org.kie.kog.StockService] (executor-thread-0) Reserve Stock for order 03e6cf79-3301-434b-b5e1-d6899b5639aa

Reviewer 3: maybe we should drop the date part of the log as it will get outdated?
